README.md, before:

# 8 Week SQL Challenge

Practice analyzing data with SQL through eight different case studies

## Table of Contents

- [Case Study 1 - Danny's Diner](#case-study-1---dannys-diner)
- [Case Study 2 - Pizza Runner](#case-study-2---pizza-runner)
- [Case Study 3 - Foodie-Fi](#case-study-3---foodie-fi)

## Background

This project involves taking on eight different case studies, found at [https://8weeksqlchallenge.com/](https://8weeksqlchallenge.com/). Each study involves using SQL to answer questions related to the business problems involved.

## Folder Structure

In this repo, there is a folder for each case study.

For each case study, there are two SQL scripts: 
- `create_schema.sql` creates the database
- `question_answers.sql` contains the queries used to answer the questions

There may also be a `data_cleaning.sql` file for any data cleaning, and additional markdown or SQL scripts to answer further questions if required.

Information about each case study is provided in this README.

## Technical Information

MySQL Community Server and MySQL Workbench are used to create the databases and run queries for the case studies. 

## Case Study 1 - Danny's Diner

Information on this case study can be found at [https://8weeksqlchallenge.com/case-study-1/](https://8weeksqlchallenge.com/case-study-1/). 

### Problem Statement

From the website:

> Danny wants to use the data to answer a few simple questions about his customers, especially about their visiting patterns, how much money they’ve spent and also which menu items are their favourite. Having this deeper connection with his customers will help him deliver a better and more personalised experience for his loyal customers. 
>
>He plans on using these insights to help him decide whether he should expand the existing customer loyalty program - additionally he needs help to generate some basic datasets so his team can easily inspect the data without needing to use SQL.
>
>Danny has provided you with a sample of his overall customer data due to privacy issues - but he hopes that these examples are enough for you to write fully functioning SQL queries to help him answer his questions!

### Entity Relationship Diagram

<img src="diagrams/case study 1.png"/>

### Questions


1. What is the total amount each customer spent at the restaurant?
2. How many days has each customer visited the restaurant?
3. What was the first item from the menu purchased by each customer?
4. What is the most purchased item on the menu and how many times was it purchased by all customers?
5. Which item was the most popular for each customer?
6. Which item was purchased first by the customer after they became a member?
7. Which item was purchased just before the customer became a member?
8. What is the total items and amount spent for each member before they became a member?
9. If each $1 spent equates to 10 points and sushi has a 2x points multiplier - how many points would each customer have?
10. In the first week after a customer joins the program (including their join date) they earn 2x points on all items, not just sushi - how many points do customer A and B have at the end of January?


## Case Study 2 - Pizza Runner

Information on this case study can be found at [https://8weeksqlchallenge.com/case-study-2/](https://8weeksqlchallenge.com/case-study-2/). 

### Problem Statement

From the website:

>Did you know that over 115 million kilograms of pizza is consumed daily worldwide??? (Well according to Wikipedia anyway…)
>
>Danny was scrolling through his Instagram feed when something really caught his eye - “80s Retro Styling and Pizza Is The Future!”
>
>Danny was sold on the idea, but he knew that pizza alone was not going to help him get seed funding to expand his new Pizza Empire - so he had one more genius idea to combine with it - he was going to Uberize it - and so Pizza Runner was launched!
>
>Danny started by recruiting “runners” to deliver fresh pizza from Pizza Runner Headquarters (otherwise known as Danny’s house) and also maxed out his credit card to pay freelance developers to build a mobile app to accept orders from customers.

### Entity Relationship Diagram

<img src="diagrams/case study 2.png"/>

### Questions

A. Pizza Metrics

1. How many pizzas were ordered?
2. How many unique customer orders were made?
3. How many successful orders were delivered by each runner?
4. How many of each type of pizza was delivered?
5. How many Vegetarian and Meatlovers were ordered by each customer?
6. What was the maximum number of pizzas delivered in a single order?
7. For each customer, how many delivered pizzas had at least 1 change and how many had no changes?
8. How many pizzas were delivered that had both exclusions and extras?
9. What was the total volume of pizzas ordered for each hour of the day?
10. What was the volume of orders for each day of the week?

B. Runner and Customer Experience

1. How many runners signed up for each 1 week period? (i.e. week starts 2021-01-01)
2. What was the average time in minutes it took for each runner to arrive at the Pizza Runner HQ to pickup the order?
3. Is there any relationship between the number of pizzas and how long the order takes to prepare?
4. What was the average distance travelled for each customer?
5. What was the difference between the longest and shortest delivery times for all orders?
6. What was the average speed for each runner for each delivery and do you notice any trend for these values?
7. What is the successful delivery percentage for each runner?

C. Ingredient Optimisation

1. What are the standard ingredients for each pizza?
2. What was the most commonly added extra?
3. What was the most common exclusion?
4. Generate an order item for each record in the customers_orders table in the format of one of the following:
    - Meat Lovers
    - Meat Lovers - Exclude Beef
    - Meat Lovers - Extra Bacon
    - Meat Lovers - Exclude Cheese, Bacon - Extra - Mushroom, Peppers
5. Generate an alphabetically ordered comma separated ingredient list for each pizza order from the customer_orders table and add a 2x in front of any relevant ingredients
    - For example: "Meat Lovers: 2xBacon, Beef, ... , Salami"
6. What is the total quantity of each ingredient used in all delivered pizzas sorted by most frequent first?

D. Pricing and Ratings

1. If a Meat Lovers pizza costs $12 and Vegetarian costs $10 and there were no charges for changes - how much money has Pizza Runner made so far if there are no delivery fees?
2. What if there was an additional $1 charge for any pizza extras?
    - Add cheese is $1 extra
3. The Pizza Runner team now wants to add an additional ratings system that allows customers to rate their runner, how would you design an additional table for this new dataset - generate a schema for this new table and insert your own data for ratings for each successful customer order between 1 to 5.
4. Using your newly generated table - can you join all of the information together to form a table which has the following information for successful deliveries?
    - customer_id
    - order_id
    - runner_id
    - rating
    - order_time
    - pickup_time
    - Time between order and pickup
    - Delivery duration
    - Average speed
    - Total number of pizzas
5. If a Meat Lovers pizza was $12 and Vegetarian $10 fixed prices with no cost for extras and each runner is paid $0.30 per kilometre traveled - how much money does Pizza Runner have left over after these deliveries?

E. Bonus Questions

If Danny wants to expand his range of pizzas - how would this impact the existing data design? Write an INSERT statement to demonstrate what would happen if a new Supreme pizza with all the toppings was added to the Pizza Runner menu?

## Case Study 3 - Foodie-Fi

Information on this case study can be found at [https://8weeksqlchallenge.com/case-study-3/](https://8weeksqlchallenge.com/case-study-3/). 

### Problem Statement

From the website:

>Subscription based businesses are super popular and Danny realised that there was a large gap in the market - he wanted to create a new streaming service that only had food related content - something like Netflix but with only cooking shows!
>
>Danny finds a few smart friends to launch his new startup Foodie-Fi in 2020 and started selling monthly and annual subscriptions, giving their customers unlimited on-demand access to exclusive food videos from around the world!
>
>Danny created Foodie-Fi with a data driven mindset and wanted to ensure all future investment decisions and new features were decided using data. This case study focuses on using subscription style digital data to answer important business questions.

### Entity Relationship Diagram

<img src="diagrams/case study 3.png"/>

### Questions

A. Customer Journey

Based off the 8 sample customers provided in the sample from the subscriptions table, write a brief description about each customer’s onboarding journey.

Try to keep it as short as possible - you may also want to run some sort of join to make your explanations a bit easier!

B. Data Analysis Questions

1. How many customers has Foodie-Fi ever had?
2. What is the monthly distribution of trial plan start_date values for our dataset - use the start of the month as the group by value
3. What plan start_date values occur after the year 2020 for our dataset? Show the breakdown by count of events for each plan_name
4. What is the customer count and percentage of customers who have churned rounded to 1 decimal place?
5. How many customers have churned straight after their initial free trial - what percentage is this rounded to the nearest whole number?
6. What is the number and percentage of customer plans after their initial free trial?
7. What is the customer count and percentage breakdown of all 5 plan_name values at 2020-12-31?
8. How many customers have upgraded to an annual plan in 2020?
9. How many days on average does it take for a customer to an annual plan from the day they join Foodie-Fi?
10. Can you further breakdown this average value into 30 day periods (i.e. 0-30 days, 31-60 days etc)
11. How many customers downgraded from a pro monthly to a basic monthly plan in 2020?

C. Challenge Payment Question

> In progress

The Foodie-Fi team wants you to create a new payments table for the year 2020 that includes amounts paid by each customer in the subscriptions table with the following requirements:

- monthly payments always occur on the same day of month as the original start_date of any monthly paid plan
- upgrades from basic to monthly or pro plans are reduced by the current paid amount in that month and start immediately
- upgrades from pro monthly to pro annual are paid at the end of the current billing period and also starts at the end of the month period
- once a customer churns they will no longer make payments

D. Outside The Box Questions

The following are open ended questions which might be asked during a technical interview for this case study - there are no right or wrong answers, but answers that make sense from both a technical and a business perspective make an amazing impression!

1. How would you calculate the rate of growth for Foodie-Fi?
2. What key metrics would you recommend Foodie-Fi management to track over time to assess performance of their overall business?
3. What are some key customer journeys or experiences that you would analyse further to improve customer retention?
4. If the Foodie-Fi team were to create an exit survey shown to customers who wish to cancel their subscription, what questions would you include in the survey?
5. What business levers could the Foodie-Fi team use to reduce the customer churn rate? How would you validate the effectiveness of your ideas?

Commit message:

Case Study 3 - Finish Part C, Tableau

README.md, after:

# 8 Week SQL Challenge

Practice analyzing data with SQL through eight different case studies

## Table of Contents

- [Case Study 1 - Danny's Diner](#case-study-1---dannys-diner)
- [Case Study 2 - Pizza Runner](#case-study-2---pizza-runner)
- [Case Study 3 - Foodie-Fi](#case-study-3---foodie-fi)

## Background

This project involves taking on eight different case studies, found at [https://8weeksqlchallenge.com/](https://8weeksqlchallenge.com/). Each study involves using SQL to answer questions related to the business problems involved.

## Folder Structure

In this repo, there is a folder for each case study.

For each case study, there are two SQL scripts: 
- `create_schema.sql` creates the database
- `question_answers.sql` contains the queries used to answer the questions

There may also be a `data_cleaning.sql` file for any data cleaning, and additional markdown or SQL scripts to answer further questions if required.

Information about each case study is provided in this README.

## Technical Information

MySQL Community Server and MySQL Workbench are used to create the databases and run queries for cases 1-3 (Case 3 uses Postgres to answer the question for Part C).

Postgres and pgAdmin are used for Case 4 onwards.

## Case Study 1 - Danny's Diner

Information on this case study can be found at [https://8weeksqlchallenge.com/case-study-1/](https://8weeksqlchallenge.com/case-study-1/). 

### Problem Statement

From the website:

> Danny wants to use the data to answer a few simple questions about his customers, especially about their visiting patterns, how much money they’ve spent and also which menu items are their favourite. Having this deeper connection with his customers will help him deliver a better and more personalised experience for his loyal customers. 
>
>He plans on using these insights to help him decide whether he should expand the existing customer loyalty program - additionally he needs help to generate some basic datasets so his team can easily inspect the data without needing to use SQL.
>
>Danny has provided you with a sample of his overall customer data due to privacy issues - but he hopes that these examples are enough for you to write fully functioning SQL queries to help him answer his questions!

### Entity Relationship Diagram

<img src="diagrams/case study 1.png"/>

### Questions


1. What is the total amount each customer spent at the restaurant?
2. How many days has each customer visited the restaurant?
3. What was the first item from the menu purchased by each customer?
4. What is the most purchased item on the menu and how many times was it purchased by all customers?
5. Which item was the most popular for each customer?
6. Which item was purchased first by the customer after they became a member?
7. Which item was purchased just before the customer became a member?
8. What is the total items and amount spent for each member before they became a member?
9. If each $1 spent equates to 10 points and sushi has a 2x points multiplier - how many points would each customer have?
10. In the first week after a customer joins the program (including their join date) they earn 2x points on all items, not just sushi - how many points do customer A and B have at the end of January?


## Case Study 2 - Pizza Runner

Information on this case study can be found at [https://8weeksqlchallenge.com/case-study-2/](https://8weeksqlchallenge.com/case-study-2/). 

### Problem Statement

From the website:

>Did you know that over 115 million kilograms of pizza is consumed daily worldwide??? (Well according to Wikipedia anyway…)
>
>Danny was scrolling through his Instagram feed when something really caught his eye - “80s Retro Styling and Pizza Is The Future!”
>
>Danny was sold on the idea, but he knew that pizza alone was not going to help him get seed funding to expand his new Pizza Empire - so he had one more genius idea to combine with it - he was going to Uberize it - and so Pizza Runner was launched!
>
>Danny started by recruiting “runners” to deliver fresh pizza from Pizza Runner Headquarters (otherwise known as Danny’s house) and also maxed out his credit card to pay freelance developers to build a mobile app to accept orders from customers.

### Entity Relationship Diagram

<img src="diagrams/case study 2.png"/>

### Questions

A. Pizza Metrics

1. How many pizzas were ordered?
2. How many unique customer orders were made?
3. How many successful orders were delivered by each runner?
4. How many of each type of pizza was delivered?
5. How many Vegetarian and Meatlovers were ordered by each customer?
6. What was the maximum number of pizzas delivered in a single order?
7. For each customer, how many delivered pizzas had at least 1 change and how many had no changes?
8. How many pizzas were delivered that had both exclusions and extras?
9. What was the total volume of pizzas ordered for each hour of the day?
10. What was the volume of orders for each day of the week?

B. Runner and Customer Experience

1. How many runners signed up for each 1 week period? (i.e. week starts 2021-01-01)
2. What was the average time in minutes it took for each runner to arrive at the Pizza Runner HQ to pickup the order?
3. Is there any relationship between the number of pizzas and how long the order takes to prepare?
4. What was the average distance travelled for each customer?
5. What was the difference between the longest and shortest delivery times for all orders?
6. What was the average speed for each runner for each delivery and do you notice any trend for these values?
7. What is the successful delivery percentage for each runner?

C. Ingredient Optimisation

1. What are the standard ingredients for each pizza?
2. What was the most commonly added extra?
3. What was the most common exclusion?
4. Generate an order item for each record in the customers_orders table in the format of one of the following:
    - Meat Lovers
    - Meat Lovers - Exclude Beef
    - Meat Lovers - Extra Bacon
    - Meat Lovers - Exclude Cheese, Bacon - Extra - Mushroom, Peppers
5. Generate an alphabetically ordered comma separated ingredient list for each pizza order from the customer_orders table and add a 2x in front of any relevant ingredients
    - For example: "Meat Lovers: 2xBacon, Beef, ... , Salami"
6. What is the total quantity of each ingredient used in all delivered pizzas sorted by most frequent first?

D. Pricing and Ratings

1. If a Meat Lovers pizza costs $12 and Vegetarian costs $10 and there were no charges for changes - how much money has Pizza Runner made so far if there are no delivery fees?
2. What if there was an additional $1 charge for any pizza extras?
    - Add cheese is $1 extra
3. The Pizza Runner team now wants to add an additional ratings system that allows customers to rate their runner, how would you design an additional table for this new dataset - generate a schema for this new table and insert your own data for ratings for each successful customer order between 1 to 5.
4. Using your newly generated table - can you join all of the information together to form a table which has the following information for successful deliveries?
    - customer_id
    - order_id
    - runner_id
    - rating
    - order_time
    - pickup_time
    - Time between order and pickup
    - Delivery duration
    - Average speed
    - Total number of pizzas
5. If a Meat Lovers pizza was $12 and Vegetarian $10 fixed prices with no cost for extras and each runner is paid $0.30 per kilometre traveled - how much money does Pizza Runner have left over after these deliveries?

E. Bonus Questions

If Danny wants to expand his range of pizzas - how would this impact the existing data design? Write an INSERT statement to demonstrate what would happen if a new Supreme pizza with all the toppings was added to the Pizza Runner menu?

## Case Study 3 - Foodie-Fi

Information on this case study can be found at [https://8weeksqlchallenge.com/case-study-3/](https://8weeksqlchallenge.com/case-study-3/). 

### Problem Statement

From the website:

>Subscription based businesses are super popular and Danny realised that there was a large gap in the market - he wanted to create a new streaming service that only had food related content - something like Netflix but with only cooking shows!
>
>Danny finds a few smart friends to launch his new startup Foodie-Fi in 2020 and started selling monthly and annual subscriptions, giving their customers unlimited on-demand access to exclusive food videos from around the world!
>
>Danny created Foodie-Fi with a data driven mindset and wanted to ensure all future investment decisions and new features were decided using data. This case study focuses on using subscription style digital data to answer important business questions.

### Entity Relationship Diagram

<img src="diagrams/case study 3.png"/>

### Questions

A. Customer Journey

Based off the 8 sample customers provided in the sample from the subscriptions table, write a brief description about each customer’s onboarding journey.

Try to keep it as short as possible - you may also want to run some sort of join to make your explanations a bit easier!

B. Data Analysis Questions

1. How many customers has Foodie-Fi ever had?
2. What is the monthly distribution of trial plan start_date values for our dataset - use the start of the month as the group by value
3. What plan start_date values occur after the year 2020 for our dataset? Show the breakdown by count of events for each plan_name
4. What is the customer count and percentage of customers who have churned rounded to 1 decimal place?
5. How many customers have churned straight after their initial free trial - what percentage is this rounded to the nearest whole number?
6. What is the number and percentage of customer plans after their initial free trial?
7. What is the customer count and percentage breakdown of all 5 plan_name values at 2020-12-31?
8. How many customers have upgraded to an annual plan in 2020?
9. How many days on average does it take for a customer to an annual plan from the day they join Foodie-Fi?
10. Can you further breakdown this average value into 30 day periods (i.e. 0-30 days, 31-60 days etc)
11. How many customers downgraded from a pro monthly to a basic monthly plan in 2020?

C. Challenge Payment Question

The Foodie-Fi team wants you to create a new payments table for the year 2020 that includes amounts paid by each customer in the subscriptions table with the following requirements:

- monthly payments always occur on the same day of month as the original start_date of any monthly paid plan
- upgrades from basic to monthly or pro plans are reduced by the current paid amount in that month and start immediately
- upgrades from pro monthly to pro annual are paid at the end of the current billing period and also starts at the end of the month period
- once a customer churns they will no longer make payments

D. Outside The Box Questions

The following are open ended questions which might be asked during a technical interview for this case study - there are no right or wrong answers, but answers that make sense from both a technical and a business perspective make an amazing impression!

1. How would you calculate the rate of growth for Foodie-Fi?
2. What key metrics would you recommend Foodie-Fi management to track over time to assess performance of their overall business?
3. What are some key customer journeys or experiences that you would analyse further to improve customer retention?
4. If the Foodie-Fi team were to create an exit survey shown to customers who wish to cancel their subscription, what questions would you include in the survey?
5. What business levers could the Foodie-Fi team use to reduce the customer churn rate? How would you validate the effectiveness of your ideas?
